# Laws on Your Phone
Where personalized legal services are delivered.
June 20, 2016

I have a hunch that “Laws on Your Phone” is not going to be the most enticing title. Based on my experience working with legal databases, I believe that the delivery of legal data on mobile devices is going to completely transform legal services, and what it means to be an informed citizen. Mobile devices present a uniquely personal set of data to developers, and this shifts the incentives in legal tech toward products that disintermediate legal services.

## Legal Data: Available but Not Useful

Given the vast body of legal codes that humans have created, running the gamut of potential behavior, any compelling legal technology will begin with effective static databases. There have been several major projects to store statutes, ordinances, judicial decisions, executive orders, regulations and constitutions ([source](https://bepress.com/products/digital-commons/why-digital-commons/customers/)). These repositories have been built to enable lawyers and law students, and are therefore compiled verbatim from the body of law, making them useful for only that limited group. These repositories have effectively opened access to legal data, but they don’t do much in terms of disintermediating legal services.

A pertinent case study in legal databases, and their limited applicability to a general audience, is [Stefan Wehrmeyer](https://medium.com/@stwe)’s [Bundestag](https://github.com/bundestag) repositories on GitHub, where the entire body of German federal legislation is uploaded periodically. This project, led from outside of the government, is targeted at identifying changes in the German law. The Bundestag repositories do a good job of making the German legislative output more transparent, but it has been difficult to derive insights from this database because the legislation has not been decoded. It does little for a programmer querying the database to know the classification of the statutes in these repositories by the book they’re in, rather than the behavior that they apply to. It is this key distinction of the readability and applicability of laws that keeps this database from changing how Germans consume the law more broadly.

Artificial intelligence (AI) has been applied to Law since the 70s, when the if-then statements of expert systems found success in situations where regulations had clearly laid out requirements and limits. The focus of AI for Law after the 70s has typically been what a law-practicing robot does once it runs out of easily derived associations ([source](http://www.iaail.org/?q=page%2Fai-law)). These projects have progressed the study of law, but little has been developed that makes it easier for citizens that don’t speak legalese to interface with the law.

One company leading the wave of consumer-focused Legal Tech companies is [LegalZoom](https://www.legalzoom.com/country/ca). For Small Business law, Wills and Trusts, and Intellectual Property law, the LegalZoom team has taken it upon themselves to take the relevant laws for those contexts and decode them in a way that makes it easy for a laymen user to understand and act upon. As it turns out these are services for which being on a mobile phone adds little value, but this simple change in encoding has led to a product that continues to grow 15 years after its inception.

## Mobile: The Platform for Personalized Services

The key property of mobile devices that will accelerate the decoding of legal data, and provide a transformational experience of laws, is context awareness. Knowing where you are and what you are doing is key to delivering personalized legal services. The idea that you shouldn’t have to key-in your requirements to receive the value of distributed data is not novel.

> A computer should never ask a question that it should know the answer to. — Benedict Evans

Context awareness creates the impetus for decoding laws in a way that makes them easy to understand, and classifying them by the behavior that they govern. It is seldom in front of a computer that people face decisions that could put them in conflict with the law. The most compelling legal applications are not accessible to laptops.

Anyone learning to drive a car on a highway learns quickly that there is a difference between the speed limit on a road, and that road’s practical speed. Writing from Toronto, the practical speed of a road is typically 20% greater than the road’s speed limit. It’s easy to say that this is because speed limits in Toronto are too low, but I would argue that the limited information that drivers have available to them is a major factor for this casual disregard for the law. Drivers exceeding the speed limit only have two numbers to consider, the acceptable speed for the road as defined by an unidentified government body, and their speed. Anyone operating outside of the confines of this poorly defined boundary can be forgiven for thinking that they’re just making good time. A worthwhile experiment in laws on your phone would be to increase the number of data points available to drivers, telling them not just their speed, but the applicable fine for the speed they’re travelling, and the presumable reason for the law: the effect their speed has on the probability of being in an accident. Armed with this additional data, citizens are able to make truly informed decisions.

Travel legal problems are compounded when crossing borders. There’s a level of comfort people have with the laws of their home that disappears when crossing into other districts, and my personal experience has been that those questions don’t arise until you’re face-to-face with difficult decisions. Now that everyone has a computer in their pocket, which has their location as an input, it is feasible to take advantage of databases that allow comparability of regions along the behavior being governed.

The Mobile Legal transformation can be thought of along two axes; the nature of the information available to the service provider and the timing as measured from the applicable behaviour. Today, legal services operators typically use the information revealed by their client through questioning, to advise them on behaviour that they are either expecting to exhibit, or are seeking atonement for. Legal services delivered on mobile platforms will use sensor data about where a user is and what they are doing to summarize only the relevant advisory for their behaviour in real time.

## Development Challenges for Mobile Legal

Different ways to consume legal data have been enabled by mobile platforms, but solution design is not going to be easy. Key themes including context awareness, and the decoding of laws by applicable behavior, are by no means cut-and-dried. Major hurdles to Mobile Legal startups include transparency in the law creation process and the different formats of legal systems.

As the Bundestag project cited earlier illustrates, it is not a typical function of government to broadcast specific changes to laws. The right sensors don’t yet exist to identify changes to laws in real time. Right now the best solution may be to employ brute force to the problem, maintaining constant communication with governing bodies to verify data validity. Whether these policy changes are delivered as a service from outside of governments, or taken on within bureaucracies, this data will become more valuable as Mobile Legal develops.

Everything I’ve mentioned in this post has been geared toward systems of Civil Law that have a specific set of documents that make up “the Law”. Any issues in creating and maintaining a legal database are compounded in countries with Common Law systems, where the body of cases coming out of the judicial system at any point in time can be construed as “the Law”. This distinction adds a layer of complexity that will be profoundly challenging to handle.

## Sherpa’s Place in Mobile Legal

You’ve made it all the way to the shameless plug portion of the post. I became interested in the general idea of Laws on Your Phone when I was crossing the border from Windsor, Ontario into Detroit, Michigan and one of my friends asked “Can you carry an open beer here?” I thought it was a ridiculous question, but after about a half-hour of Googling, the car of Canadians was nearly convinced that this was the case. How could it be that the best solution to legal questions was to dig through a mess of legal code and speculation? Ivan Sharko and I set out to understand how a set of behaviors could be accounted for in a way that could be easily consumed on a mobile device.

Our first product, [Sherpa](https://www.joinsherpa.com), provides decoded visa and customs laws, enabling travellers to understand everything they need to legally cross a border, and helping them understand and apply for travel visas on their phone. This product puts all of the policies and documentation needed to cross a border in the hands of a traveller when they’re in that situation. Our goal is to make your passport obsolete, and push for more standardized international migration laws.
